# cs465-fullStack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN


Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).

There are several different front ends being utilized in this full stack development project. The customer facing site started as an express HTML site however as the project continued it was changed to a more dynamic website. Instead of using HTML it used .hbs views. This helped with rendering speed as you no longer had to load every component of the site every time you refreshed. The old HTML being static could not interact with the backend database and update any of the information displayed on the website. Once the static site was replaced with more dynamic components Javascript was used to control various things on the site. One such thing was that it pulled trip information from the database such as various trips and food options. The database in this project was MongoDB which is a nonSQL non relational database that is open source for those who do not know. Later a single page application was added to the project which means that it did not fully refresh its single page based on any user interactions like the HTML pages did. 
Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
	
The Reason for using MongoDB is due to the fact that the database can be easily modified. It is very scalable, it can be scaled rapidly in the horizontal direction because it is not relational.
How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?

	JSON is the standard for formatting object data to a string for easy transport. Javascript and various other languages can easily read it, turning the string data into various objects. This easily ties the front and back end development together and provides a way for javascript objects to be stored on the backend and used in various different ways.
Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
	
One such instance where code was refactored to improve functionality as well as efficiency is the introduction of the trip card. This is opposed to the trip listing components. Having two or more separate components rendering the same information is not terribly efficient, however having each trip render separately while still being part of the same thing is far better for the functionality of the site. Reusing user interface components is good as it reduces the size of the application, makes the development process much quicker as well as decreases any chance of getting errors and vulnerabilities.
Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
Before attempting to add security there were various ways of testing the endpoints. The first was to simply see if any errors were thrown when going to the localhost web address. Most of the errors that could be thrown were custom errors which allowed me to see what exactly was breaking allowing me to figure out how to fix it far more easily. Much of my testing however was done by using Postman. Postman allowed me to easily make HTTP requests while saving them to be used again in the future. It takes security measures and various inputs and displays the json responses. I was able to test the authentication as well as general functionality of the API fairly easily because of this. 

	How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?

	Although I have no intention of working on any frontend in my career I believe that having a strong understanding of the full stack by having worked on a full stack project such as this is extremely important. Understanding http requests such as GET, PUT, POST and delete will likely come up even while working on parts of a project that are not necessarily websites. The reason for this is that many things end up working in tandem or as part of a website. During an internship I had several years ago I was working on various functions in a custom database for collecting and storing data from various factories and mining operations where I ended up having to work on such requests. Knowing how endpoints work as well as knowing how to test them is something that is important as well even when not working directly on a client side application as down the line anything one does in a software job will eventually make its way to a client side application. Knowing how to make descriptive errors and test for them will make whoever is working on the client side application much happier as they will be able to find any problem with relative ease. Knowing the ends and outs of security is probably the most important thing to know about on this list. I have heard various horror stories where people have put various holes in security causing customers' valuable data to be leaked causing a company to lose millions of dollars down the line. To reiterate despite not having any intention of working anywhere near front end customer facing development this was one of the more valuable classes I have had going to this school as anything I will work on will eventually make its way to a customer facing application.
